[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In the course of evolution
in which life on Earth passed
through stages of single-celled
organisms to eukaryotes
to multicelled and
complex organisms,
one ever-present force has
guided all of it to where we
are now--
integration.
That underlying
principle that is
seen in all arenas
of intelligent life.
Individual organisms
utilize anything
in their environment to ensure
life and postpone death.
By far, the most advantageous
way for this to happen
is for peaceful and intelligent
coexistence to take place.
The flora feeds the fauna, which
in turn digests and returns
the food back to the flora.
The flowers attract the bees,
which in turn spreads the seeds
and plants more flowers.
The weather patterns, seasonal
cycles, birds, bees, plants,
and trees all live
within a greater organism
that many now call Gaia--
the living Earth.
And upon this Earth, there
is no such thing as waste.
Each part feeds the next
and eventually cycles back
into itself.
All these intelligent
moving parts
fit together in an
integrated system.
The purpose of integration
is for many individuals
to work towards one higher cause
that no one individual could
achieve alone.
In the world of computers,
software and hardware
are upgraded perpetually
for one purpose--
to better integrate the rest of
the endless web of technology.
These upgrades not only add
new features to the system,
but they remove disruptive
or obsolete features as well.
In the world of
psychedelic plants,
we find their effect
on human consciousness
not only adds
insights and visions,
but dismantles unproductive
or harmful patterns.
But when a deep psychedelic
experience has completed,
oftentimes, the seeker is
left with more questions
than answers.
It is precisely
these moments that
call upon us to take time in
peace, silence, and reflective
contemplation in order to pick
up the shattered pieces of who
we believe we were, discard
what no longer serves us,
and hold on to that
which may still teach us.
And to reintegrate back into
the dynamic system from which we
were momentarily departed.
>> Probably just as important
as the psychedelic experience is
the process of integration.
When you have a
psychedelic experience, all
your preconceived notions
of the world melt down--
gone.
You could develop all
this new information--
floods of new information.
And with all this
new information,
you have to integrate it into
your life when you come back.
>> Well, the physical
body has been taxed.
The brain, in some
ways, has been taxed.
Our psychology has
been taxed in that we
have to re-evaluate some
pretty fundamental assumptions
about ourselves.
And energetically, our spiritual
body has been blasted open
and is reforming, and that's
what's happening energetically
with psychedelics.
And like anything, it takes
time for that to happen.
It's a process.
It doesn't happen over a few
hours, or even a few days.
Sometimes it can take many,
many weeks or months to return
to a different baseline--
a baseline that's
more holistic, maybe.
>> Overwhelming experiences
often call us to take breaks
in order to process
what just happened.
After the death of a loved
one, there's a grieving period.
After running a marathon,
a recovery phase.
And after the fabric of
reality is unwoven and stitched
back together, after people's
old habits are dismantled,
there is also a period
in which the tissues
of the body and the patterns
of the mind need to begin anew.
In the daily grind of
economically-driven society
and survivalism all
around, the moments
we give ourselves to reflect
upon our lifestyles and choices
are few and far between.
And this happens even
after psychedelic journeys
that beg for us to slow down
and integrate the messages they
hold.
>> I think it's a mistake when
people rush off to their job
or rush off to do something
that re-establishes all the old
patterns, because there's this
amazing opportunity that people
have when, after the
psychedelic experience ends,
when things are fresh, when
their brain is almost like
a newborn baby, and they have
this ability to establish new
patterns, you want to strengthen
those new patterns and this
process of integration instead
of going back to the old
patterns.
>> A lot of people I hear
from say that they believe
ayahuasca's going
to be very damaging,
because people who come back
to society find it very,
very difficult to cope after
they come back to society.
Gee, I knew this guy,
and he wasn't the same
after he came back.
It can be that way for people,
because we live in a very, very
dysfunctional society.
That's why it's so
important for people
to integrate their
experience after ceremony.
You've got to sit down
with the people you
had the ceremony with
and talk about it,
and realize what
you've experienced
and realize what the world
is that you've now opened up.
And realize what you're
going to be coming back into.
See, there's the
problem with ayahuasca,
is that it does reconnect
people to the earth
so much that when they come
back to somewhere like New York,
they just go, oh, my God.
What am I swimming in?
I can't do this anymore.
>> Many of those who have
traveled to the Amazon jungle
to try ayahuasca in its
traditional surroundings
experience culture shock.
The language, the environment,
the customs, and of course,
the medicine become a
whirlwind of new experience
that can be stressful
on the body and mind.
This is what is called
a peak experience,
and now these experiences
are so easily attainable
that people with no
preparation and no context
for the life-altering
journey to come
are flooding the Amazon
in search of this brew.
In the 1960s, the youth were
increasingly experimenting
with psychedelics and
ripping apart their most
cherished belief systems,
but with little education
and a lot of ambition.
So even if they were
waking the sleeping mind
to new information,
were they truly ready?
Just as the gut is equipped
to break down complex food
into basic building
blocks for energy,
the nervous system
must switch from
sympathetic, or activity-based,
to parasympathetic, which
is the rest and digest state.
Without this switch,
without the resting state,
the food struggles to digest.
So what is the result
of moving from one
peak psychedelic
experience to the next
without fully digesting
the previous insights that
were gained?
What happens when people
do ceremony after ceremony
without time for integration?
>> If you take another medicine
before the integration is done,
you start to stack those
big realizations and big
understandings without
fully integrating them.
And in a sense, it can create
its own psychic burden.
And it shows up like anxiety.
It's like, oh, I'm just
overwhelmed by the concepts
that I've received from my
medicine work experiences.
So there are times
when doing regular work
repeatedly is healthy and
important, particularly
in healing a trauma or
something like that.
You're doing some real clinical
work and it's a period.
But then after
that, there should
be long, extended periods
of non-medicine use,
just to really, fully
receive and embody
the lessons of the medicine.
>> In most ayahuasca circles,
after each night of ceremony,
the group will sit together
and share their experiences
or insights in order to allow
the group to reflect upon what
they experienced and why.
Some speak about what
they saw or felt.
Others realize that
they need to be better
to the people around them,
or spend more time laughing
and enjoying life.
And others find themselves still
in the throes of the journey.
Many of them have
similar reasons
for attending the ceremony
in the first place,
and it's nearly always because
the life that they were leading
seemed off-track, and
now they're desperately
looking for the
trail of breadcrumbs
to lead them back to
the familiar world.
>> Many people say, I am
here because I lost myself.
It's interesting to hear,
because, hey, I'm here.
How can I lose myself?
So what they are reporting is
that their spiritual awareness
knows that they're not complete.
Somewhere on their highway of
life, they took the wrong exit,
and then nasty
things have happened,
experiences happen, and they
want to go back on the highway.
So the beauty is, when
you hear 40 people share,
you lose your modesty or
shyness, or even shame,
and you just share.
And so I share, and I
hear myself say something
that I did not prepare.
I was going to say
something different,
but because of the whole group
and the sphere, the atmosphere,
the vibration, the resonance--
because it's a dynamic field
that we're all in--
I hear myself say
a different thing.
And I think, where
does that come from?
It's, of course, my own
subconscious speaking.
>> The ability for these
medicines to reveal
our subconscious mind to us
might be the hallmark of how
psychedelic plants can offer
us life-changing moments.
And out of all the
plant medicines,
ayahuasca ceremonies
in modern contexts
are held in a slightly different
manner from other ceremonies.
There's usually an emphasis
on the sharing circle.
Whether or not
everyone speaks is
second to the priority of all
being present for the sharing.
These moments highlight the
need for such peak experiences
to be spoken about,
listened to, and respected.
This allows for the
nervous system to settle,
for the mind to evaluate
the experiences,
and to integrate the
lessons of the medicine
into the tissues of the body.
There are very real shifts
taking place internally--
and even externally--
around those
who partake in the ceremony.
To illustrate the effects of
what psychedelic plants are
truly doing to the human
body and the energy field,
a professor at St. Petersburg
University, Dr. Konstantin
Korotkov, has developed
the technology
to measure the biofield
of the human body
during ayahuasca ceremonies.
>> My main background is
quantum physics and biophysics.
And at some time, I
developed instruments.
Their overall name
is [INAUDIBLE]..
And this instrument allows us
to detect, measure, and analyze
human energy field, and we
work in predictive integrative
medicine.
It is measuring so-named
stimulated electrophoton
emission.
We apply very short electrical
impulses to our fingers,
and we have response in the
form of photons and electrons
from the skin.
So we are measuring
people before, during,
after ceremonies,
and this allows
to understand how
people transform,
how they experience this.
And typically, of
course, it takes--
ayahuasca is very
energy-consuming process.
It opens up human chakras.
It opens up your energy field.
That is why people
become vulnerable.
And of course, they lose energy
in the process of ayahuasca.
That's why, later on,
they need to be closed--
energy fields should be closed--
and they need to be re-charged.
And we see this in
our measurements.
We can see that initial
energy field was quite strong,
80 Joules.
And it's uniform, very good.
And after ayahuasca, it is 61
Joules, so it dropped down.
It shrinked, as we discussed.
And we need to take it down
so it is practically one day
after.
Same as on level of stress.
Level of stress drop down,
you see, from 07 to 91,
so it's very positive effect.
But energy dropped down
as well, quite strongly.
And we see dramatic
effect on chakras as well.
Chakras was very disoriented,
and after ayahuasca ceremony,
they became very well-aligned.
Not ideal, of course.
This is not meditation process,
this is different process.
But they're much more
aligned than before.
>> Dr. Korotkov mentions
that meditation puts the body
and mind into a different
process than an ayahuasca
ceremony.
The greatest difference is
that the meditative insights
are arrived at by an inner
process of relaxing, breathing,
focusing, and observing.
By its very nature, meditation
is the process of integration.
This is why every spiritual
tradition uses meditation
to integrate our concepts
of life with real life
at the end of each day.
Even in the Amazonian
ayahuasca ceremonies,
after each icaro, or song, a
moment of silence is observed.
In order to close
the photon field
around the body
before the ceremony,
the shaman blows mapacho smoke
over the crown of the head,
and several traditions also
include a flower-infused bath
after ceremony
specifically to close
any rip or hole in
that field after it
is weakened by the medicine.
This phenomena is also
seen after receiving news.
If the news is not
shocking or destructive
to the current mindframe,
not much energy
is required to digest
the new information.
But if the news is intense and
the person is not prepared,
it can cause such an awakening,
such a transformation,
that the energy
field around the body
is diminished as it
moves inward to digest
the earthshaking information.
So what if a psychedelic
journey reveals the inadequacies
and shadow sides of the modern
society we identify ourselves
with?
>> Enlightenment is a
very destructive process.
Enlightenment is a
breaking down of everything
you thought was real, and
none of this society is real.
Becoming aware of that is key.
That's the only way
we're going to heal it.
But that's why I say to people--
I suggest they do not
undertake this path lightly.
The path to enlightenment and
the path to spiritual awakening
is very, very uncomfortable.
You're not going to go
there and drink on Sunday,
become this new age
guru who's shining light
and is going to go out
and be warm and fuzzy
and speak the truth everywhere.
You're going to wake up
and look back at the world
and go, oh, my God.
What have I been doing for
the last 30 or 40 years,
and what am I doing, and what
is this world I'm living in?
And it can be very,
very confrontational.
So if you're not ready for that,
maybe don't do the medicine.
>> And so psychedelics can often
bring up a variety of different
kinds of material that's very
difficult for people to accept
and to figure out how
to move forward with.
But that's also the gift
of the psychedelics--
is that it forced us to
deal with these issues
that we were otherwise able
to bury into our unconscious.
So people often have
difficult experiences,
because they don't have the
support necessary to help them
move through the new
information and to find
a different level of
integration regarding
the traumatic experiences
that they had in the past.
>> If it truly is a lack of
support that keeps us from
integrating new and
useful information,
what kind of support
are we in need of?
By looking to the experts
who have been researching
psychedelics in both modern
and ancestral contexts,
we can begin to acknowledge
how shamanic cultures use
psychedelic plants to strengthen
and expand the community,
and even raise their youth.
>> The major problem is, how
to integrate this into a larger
culture?
If you were a [? witch ?]
living in Mexico
or in one of these cultures
where everybody is part
of rites of passage and so on--
these experiences-- then it's
actually helping the culture,
because the way of living, the
life strategy, the philosophy,
the mythology, the
spirituality of the culture
comes out of these experiences.
So they actually
initiate the young people
into their way of living
and their way of thinking.
This is very different.
We see what happened
in the '60s.
Suddenly, you had
a young generation
that started creating a totally
different hierarchy of values.
Make love, not war--
very pacifistic feeling.
Very much concerned about
the environment, and so on.
They started differentiating
themselves in the way
they looked--
beards and long hair and
beads and funny uniforms.
They're painting their cars
with psychedelic colors
so every cop knows there's
grass to be found there.
Not very skillful revolution.
>> A rite of passage is
something that many traditional
cultures do value, where young
people maybe go through some
rite.
It could be something
like your first hunt,
or it might be something like
getting your first tattoo.
It might also be your
first ayahuasca ceremony,
or your first peyote ceremony.
Of course, in our
modern culture,
we have ceremonies, which all
too few people have nowadays--
like a confirmation, a bat
mitzvah, a bar mitzvah.
But I think that we need
some sort of rite of passage,
because young people--
they want to show
that they're more grown up.
I don't know how it is
in various cultures,
but I do know that
young people are going
to come up with some pretty--
sometimes dangerous--
rites of passage.
And very often, it also
entails not being truthful
with their parents.
And wouldn't you
want your teenagers
to tell you they were
thinking about doing something
of this nature,
they were thinking
about doing psilocybin,
and that they
could talk to you about it?
That you knew where they were,
who they were with, and maybe
you could even give them some
guidance, like you should
have an intention, a prayer.
Be in a safe set and setting.
>> Current forms of rites of
passage are seen at age 16 when
children in the US
can legally drive,
at age 18 when they can vote,
and 21 when they can legally
drink.
But these achievements
are not earned
by bravery,
intelligence, or honor,
but simply by being alive
through enough solar cycles
to be considered an adult.
Because it is only natural
that youth crave to perform
more mature tasks in order
to prove themselves,
ancestral tribes
have traditionally crafted
cultural passage ways
for children to become adults.
In the small island
nation of Vanuatu,
boys at the age of 7 or 8 begin
bungee jumping, oftentimes
off a 98-foot tall tower with
a vine tied to their ankles,
to symbolize their bravery and
their ascent into adulthood.
Among the Apache
of North America,
the young girls must
complete the sunrise ceremony
after their first menstruation,
in which they paint themselves
and reenact the Apache origin
myth of the first woman.
For four days, they are
not to touch their skin
and can only drink water.
The Inuit youth are brought
into the harsh arctic weather
to learn to speak
with animals and hunt.
At age 13, the boys of
the Sateré-Mawé tribe
in the Brazilian jungle wear
gloves filled with bullet ants,
which cause extreme
throbbing pain.
All of these rites of
passage call upon the youth
to engage with their
community and perform
some sacrificial ritual
in order to become
an adult in that
particular tribe.
But these communities weren't
simply initiating people
into adulthood.
They were integrating them
into a healing tradition,
in order to serve others
and the planet at large.
For the hallmark of
a functional society
is peaceful and intelligent
community goals.
>> One of the classic
features of shamanism was that
the neophyte who was trying to
develop shamanic skills would
have to go through a very
arduous ritual ordeal,
often spending weeks or more
alone in the wilderness,
and often with the expectation
that they were going to have
to encounter and deal
with the animals--
the beasts-- that
came to kill them.
And I think that this reflects
a primordial human concern.
Once we become conscious, we
realize we're going to die.
Your dog doesn't know
he's going to die.
The antelope out on the
plains doesn't worry about
whether or not the tiger or
lion's going to eat him--
unless it's right there.
But we have a consciousness
to project into the future
and say, eventually,
it's my turn.
So how do we deal
with this angst,
this anxiety about death?
Well, shamanic
practices had a variety
of different ways of
addressing this death concern,
and one was that you
acquired an understanding
of your spiritual nature--
that the body dies,
but the spirit doesn't.
And so people move
beyond the concern
about their physical demise to
understanding this continuity
of spiritual existence.
>> The realization
that someone comes to--
that one day they will die--
doesn't sink in all at once.
It takes many moments of
considering the implications
of this final event to truly
make an impact on that person's
daily life.
Some people, perhaps, never
come to this realization.
So to fully integrate
the knowledge
that one day this body will
die and return to the earth,
tribes have traditionally
used extreme rites of passage,
as well as psychedelic
plant ceremonies.
Without dedicated moments
of focusing on mortality,
we may never fully
realize the importance
of living life as if we truly
know it will one day end.
Those who have gone through
near-death experiences
have reported much
of the same phenomena
as psychedelic journeys.
Portals of light, other-worldly
beings and ancestors,
timelessness, and
even the total life
reviews that cause
them to re-evaluate
what matters to them.
They often report that they
felt every harsh word or action
that they've ever given,
but from the other person's
perspective.
Another commonality between
near-death experiences
and deep psychedelic
ceremonies is the realization
of how we truly use
the precious time
that we're given in this body,
and that this fleeting moment
of life between birth and
death should be devoted
to the people around us.
In fact, all of life seeks
to integrate and support
each other as one
living organism.
>> You couldn't develop
consciousness in a vacuum.
It takes an
interaction of things.
And all of life is really
an interaction of things.
The body you see before you--
they say every seven
years, I've completely
gone through all my cellular
matter and reproduce new cells.
My old cells have died off.
Hair's fallen off.
Skin's fallen off, and
I'm completely rebuilt.
Same thing with consciousness.
I was on my 30th birthday,
and I was kind of depressed.
My first book hadn't
been published yet,
and I was feeling like
kind of a failure.
And I did some mushrooms,
and I was just like--
I started out with a friend,
but I was being such a bummer,
I think he just went home.
And I was lying in this
bathtub, having a bath,
feeling sorry for myself.
And there was this spider plant
hanging above the bath tub.
And it was just
dry as dry, and I
could see its
roots and tentacles
vibrating, sensing the wealth
of water that I was in,
just going like this.
And I cupped my hand and I
put the water up to his roots,
and it just went
[WHOOSH OF AIR] limp,
and just started sucking the
water right out of my hands.
And it just totally brought
the whole thing to life for me
in a fascinating
way that I don't
think I would have
ever noticed had it not
been for the effects
of the mushrooms.
And yeah, I think that
it makes us realize
that we are on Mother Earth.
That's what these plants offer.
>> That's the message.
We have to re-understand
that we are part of nature.
We're not in control of it.
And we are potentially capable
of damaging it very severely
by upsetting and
destabilizing all
of these homeostatic
processes that keep Gaia--
the Gaia organism--
in equilibrium.
We need to wake up.
I think the plant teachers
have been urging us
to wake up as long as we've
been associated with them,
but we're not very--
we don't listen very well, and
it's getting even more urgent.
First you have to wake up.
Then you have to wise up.
You have to have the
realization, then
what do you do about it?
That is trickier.
But I think it's inevitable.
>> According to many
conversations surrounding this
topic, the most important thing
we can wake up to is the nature
of our individual egos--
the collection of beliefs
and behavioral patterns
we have about ourselves.
The ego often wants to
know all and control all
in order to ensure no one
else can take what is ours.
But this violent cycle
of fighting for our place
at the expense of others
is fantasy, not reality.
The web of life is already
functional without our desire
to exploit it and milk
it for everything we can.
This is called
scarcity mentality--
the belief that there
isn't enough for everyone,
so I better get mine.
Unfortunately, when
someone is in this mode,
it is difficult to wake
up to its inadequacy,
especially when surrounded
by others that are also
stuck in scarcity mentality.
So the process of waking up is
a surrender and the letting go
of our ambition to have
more than others and more
than we need.
From there, the
wising up process
consists only of peacefully
and intelligently integrating
with the one dynamic web of life
that we are all dancing upon,
a surrender to the
flowing river of life.
And the punchline at the
end of this divine comedy
is that one way or
another, through intention
or exhaustion, the
river will win.
But why, then, does the ego
seem so afraid of surrendering
to the ways of the universe?
>> The ego wants closure.
It wants a complete explanation.
The beginning of
wisdom, I believe,
is the ability to accept
an inherent messiness
in your explanation
of what's going on,
because nowhere is it writ
that human minds should
be able to give a full
accounting of creation
in all dimensions
and on all levels.
The universe, at this moment,
is a tremendously complicated,
integrated, multi-level thing.
Perhaps what the universe
is is a kind of system
in which more advanced
forms of order
actually influence previous
states of organization.
They are attractors.
That means that
they exert influence
on less-organized
states, and pull them
toward some kind of end state.
The attractor is at the bottom
of a very deep pit into which
all phenomena is cascading.
>> All life is truly a lesson,
and the attractor that Terence
speaks of is that invisible
compelling force that calls us
to continue learning in life.
The increasing complexity
of the universe
may be exactly what calls us to
abandon the ambition of knowing
everything, or
playing every role,
and to simply play our own role,
to keep observing and engaging
reality in order to use
the information that we
do have more wisely.
Perhaps the evolution of
complexity in the universe
is a reflection of our capacity
to understand and utilize
more complex information.
And one of the most complex and
malleable instruments we use
is the mysterious and
ever-evolving human brain.
>> The brain is a
product of evolution,
and the brain evolved as a
profound information generator.
It generates an inordinate
amount of complex information,
but also to receive and
process information.
And the environment is also
an information generator.
The environment is full.
The external world is
full of information,
and this information is
always entering the brain.
But the brain needs to learn
to sample information that is
useful and to learn from that.
And in a sense, sensory
information sculpts the brain.
It's sculpts the connectivity--
the patterns of connectivity.
All of these neurons--
these cells in the brain--
they are connected in
an extremely complex,
intricate pattern.
As sensory information
enters the brain,
it changes the structure.
>> Perhaps the universe
itself is one single phenomena
overflowing with information,
and our brains are the part
of that phenomena that
collects, processes,
and generates new combinations
and patterns in service
to an ever-evolving relationship
between creation itself
and that which is
continually creating it.
If psychedelic plants truly
break down old beliefs
and thought patterns to make
way for the new, the way
a wildfire clears the
debris from a forest
so new life can grow,
then maybe the process
of integrating into
the cosmos is not
a dilemma to be solved,
but a dance to be danced.
The idea of solving
problems only
allows for win, lose,
or draw scenarios.
If life were viewed more as a
relationship of moving parts--
a cosmic dance do
engage with, learn from,
and perpetually refine--
then the outcome
wouldn't be limited
by who gets what in the end, but
by how deeply we've connected.
Perhaps the point
of living is not
a measure of the
individual puzzle
pieces, but how they integrate
into the full picture of life
itself.
Up next, we will open two sides
of the holy mushroom theory--
a debate that might
shake the foundation
of the Christian
religion and its origins.
[MUSIC PLAYING]